=== PAGE 1 ===
PNAS  2024  Vol. 121  No. 29 e2401420121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 1 of 12
RESEARCH ARTICLE | 
Significance
This study changes our view of 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) initiation 
and progression. Mutations 
promoting cerebral beta- amyloid 
(Aβ) deposition guarantee rare 
genetic forms of AD. Thus, the 
prevailing hypothesis has been 
that Aβ is central to initiation and 
progression of all AD, despite 
contrary animal and patient 
evidence. We show that age- 
related T cells generate 
neurodegeneration with 
compelling features of AD in 
mice, with distinct T cell functions 
required for pathological 
initiation and neurodegenerative 
progression. Knowledge from 
these mice was applied to 
successfully predict previously 
unrecognized features of human 
AD and generate tools for its 
clinical management.
Competing interest statement: C.J.W. is the author of 
patents PCT/US2016/049598, WO2017/040594, and 
PCT/US2019/017879. R.C. and K.L.B. are co- authors on 
patent PCT/US2019/017879. PCT/US2016/049598 and 
WO 2017/040594 are licensed by Cedars- Sinai Medical 
Center to T- Neuro Pharma, Inc. C.J.W. has received salary 
and ownership interest in T- Neuro Pharma, Inc.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by PNAS. 
This open access article is distributed under Creative 
Commons Attribution - NonCommercial- NoDerivatives 
License 4.0 (CC BY- NC- ND).
1A.P., A.R., and M.J. contributed equally to this work.
2Present address: Department of Microbiology & Molecular 
Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84604.
3Present address: Department of Translational Science, 
A2 Biotherapeutics, Inc., Agoura Hills, CA 91301.
4To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: 
chris@tneuropharma.com.
This article contains supporting information online at 
https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.  
2401420121/- /DCSupplemental.
Published July 12, 2024.
NEUROSCIENCE
PSYCHOLOGICAL AND COGNITIVE SCIENCES
Antigen- specific age- related memory CD8 T cells induce 
and track Alzheimer’s- like neurodegeneration
Akanksha Panwara,1, Altan Rentsendorja,1 , Michelle Jhuna,1, Robert M. Cohenb, Ryan Cordnera,c,2, Nicole Gullc , Robert N. Pechnickd, Gretchen Duvalla,  
Armen Mardirosa,3, David Golchiana, Hannah Schublooma, Lee- Way Jine, Debby Van Damf,g , Yannick Vermeirenf,h,i , Hans De Reuj ,  
Peter Paul De Deynf,g,k,l, Jevgenij A. Raskatovl, Keith L. Blacka , Dwain K. Irvina,m , Brian A. Williamsn, and Christopher J. Wheelera,l,m,o,p,4
Affiliations are included on p. 11.
Edited by Lawrence Steinman, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; received February 5, 2024; accepted May 23, 2024
Cerebral (Aβ) plaque and (pTau) tangle deposition are hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease 
(AD), yet are insufficient to confer complete AD- like neurodegeneration experimentally. 
Factors acting upstream of Aβ/pTau in AD remain unknown, but their identification 
could enable earlier diagnosis and more effective treatments. T cell abnormalities are 
emerging AD hallmarks, and CD8 T cells were recently found to mediate neurodegen-
eration downstream of tangle deposition in hereditary neurodegeneration models. The 
precise impact of T cells downstream of Aβ/pTau, however, appears to vary depending 
on the animal model. Our prior work suggested that antigen- specific memory CD8 
T (“hiT”) cells act upstream of Aβ/pTau after brain injury. Here, we examine whether 
hiT cells influence sporadic AD- like pathophysiology upstream of Aβ/pTau. Examining 
neuropathology, gene expression, and behavior in our hiT mouse model we show that 
CD8 T cells induce plaque and tangle- like deposition, modulate AD- related genes, and 
ultimately result in progressive neurodegeneration with both gross and fine features 
of sporadic human AD. T cells required Perforin to initiate this pathophysiology, and 
IFNγ for most gene expression changes and progression to more widespread neurode-
generative disease. Analogous antigen- specific memory CD8 T cells were significantly 
elevated in the brains of human AD patients, and their loss from blood corresponded 
to sporadic AD and related cognitive decline better than plasma pTau- 217, a promising 
AD biomarker candidate. We identify an age- related factor acting upstream of Aβ/pTau 
to initiate AD- like pathophysiology, the mechanisms promoting its pathogenicity, and 
its relevance to human sporadic AD.
Alzheimer’s disease | T cell | mouse model | neuroscience | biomarker
Deposits of aggregated amyloid plaques containing beta- amyloid (Aβ) and neurofibrillary 
tangles (NFTs) comprised of hyperphosphorylated tau (pTau) are the primary neuro­
pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Aβ deposition precedes that of NFTs 
in all forms of AD, and rare inherited forms of the disease are due to mutated (AD- mut) 
genes that promote the deposition of toxic Aβ in the brain. Thus, a prominent hypothesis 
is that Aβ is central to initiation and progression of all AD. While Aβ deposition clearly 
plays an important role, evidence that it is sufficient to initiate and/or maintain AD 
pathogenesis is lacking. For example, laboratory animals expressing one or even several 
human AD- mut transgenes that guarantee AD in their human carriers fail to exhibit either 
robust neurodegeneration or NFTs (1, 2). Moreover, targeting Aβ deposition has resulted 
in hundreds of failed clinical trials, with modest and sometimes controversial clinical 
efficacy demonstrated in a few trials only recently (3). Finally, up to a third of elderly 
individuals possess Aβ deposition sufficient for AD diagnosis, yet are cognitively normal 
and may remain so for life (4). These findings suggest that Aβ requires distinct cofactors 
to initiate AD. The search for such factors, with occasional exceptions (5), has primarily 
focused on processes downstream of Aβ. A recent finding, however, documented that a 
patient harboring a deterministic AD- mut gene normally guaranteeing neurodegeneration 
by age 45, exhibited no clinical symptoms into their 70s (6). This protection was evidently 
afforded by a second germline mutation in the ApoE3 gene that disrupts lipid metabolism 
(7), highlighting the possibility that the pathogenic effects of Aβ may be dominantly 
inhibited by preexisting physiological processes upstream of Aβ. While the precise nature 
of such processes remains unknown, identifying them could allow earlier diagnosis and 
lead to more effective AD treatments.
Among Aβ- independent factors potentially contributing to AD pathogenesis, CD8 
T cell abnormalities have recently emerged as some of the most intriguing. Recent studies 
have verified and extended earlier reports of T cell abnormalities in AD- related conditions, 
OPEN ACCESS

=== PAGE 2 ===
2 of 12   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 pnas.org
including resident memory CD8 T (T RM) and other memory 
T cell accumulation in CSF and/or brain of aging and AD- afflicted 
individuals (8, 9). CD8 T cells within CSF also dysregulate 
chemokine signaling when cognitive impairment is evident, reg­
ulate neuronal and synaptic gene expression when they accumulate 
in the hippocampus, and promote neuroinflammation and cog­
nitive decline, in transgenic (Tg) mice (10–12). Moreover, T cells 
increase in areas of AD- mut Tg (AD- Tg) mouse brain and human 
AD brain with tau neuropathology (10), which correlates with 
cognitive symptoms in AD (13, 14). Most surprisingly, CD8 
T cells together with microglia and interferon - gamma (IFNγ), 
were recently shown to mediate neurodegeneration in tau- transgenic 
mice (15). Finally, a very recent study on CD8 T cells in AD- Tg 
mice presented evidence that they actually dampen Aβ/pTau 
pathology through CXCL16- CXCR6 intercellular communica­
tion between T cells and microglia (16). Thus, the role of CD8 
T cells appears variable, at least in transgenic rodents. Moreover, 
T cell changes in AD are often presumed to follow Aβ deposition. 
In all of the studies above, for example, T cell abnormalities were 
examined after AD pathology was established. The potential role 
of CD8 T cells upstream of Aβ (or tau) has thus not been exam­
ined. Nevertheless, the potential relationship of tissue- resident 
CD8 T cells in particular to ApoE- mediated AD risk and/or pro­
tection makes them especially intriguing in this regard (17).
T o examine the effect of aging T cells upstream of Aβ/pTau 
pathology, we recently developed the “hiT” model of rapid CD8 
T cell aging in young mice. In this model, age- related homeostatic 
CD8 T cell expansion is mimicked on a much faster time scale 
(18). This results in morphological, functional, and genotypic 
changes in homeostatically induced (“hi”) T cells similar to those 
occurring with age. These changes include human- like predomi­
nance of CD103+ memory CD8 T cells in the general circulation, 
and accumulation of a non- Aβ antigen (amyloid precursor pro­
tein; APP)- specific age- related subpopulation of T cells in the 
brain. T ransfer of these age- related CD8 T cells from hiT mice 
into wild- type B6 mice increased human- like amyloid and fibrillar 
pTau in the brain after percussive brain injury, as well as neuronal 
marker loss regardless of injury (18). This suggested that age- related 
CD8 T cells act upstream to promote both Aβ and fibrillar pTau 
accumulation in a non- AD setting. Here, we examined the rela­
tionship of age- related CD8 T cells to events upstream of Aβ, and 
possibly to other aspects of AD pathophysiology, by first interro­
gating proteinopathy, neurodegeneration, and behavior in the hiT 
mouse model. We then examined mechanisms whereby hiT cells 
mediate pathological characteristics using T cells from functional 
knockout donors as well as RNAseq analysis. Finally, we examined 
the clinical relevance of antigen- specific and parental CD8 T cell 
populations to human AD using flow cytometry, tissue staining, 
and protein analysis in human patients.
Results
Creation of hiT Mouse. PBS, or CD8 T cells from mouse wild- type 
donors were injected into young (6 to 8 wk) B6.Foxn1 hosts (PBS and 
wt- CD8 groups, respectively). Limited analyses of young B6.Foxn1 
hosts injected with wild- type CD4 T cells or CD4 plus CD8 T cells 
together (wt- CD4 and wt- CD8+CD4 groups, respectively), were 
also performed (SI Appendix, Fig. S1A). Females were exclusively 
used to avoid male- specific autoimmune disease dynamics, some 
of which are associated with CD8 T cell homeostatic expansion, 
in related mouse strains (19, 20). The donor T cells acquire age- 
related resident memory- like (TRM) phenotype, as well as age- related 
genotype and function as they expand. CD8 T cells reactive to a non- 
Aβ epitope on APP then selectively accumulate in the brain of these 
hiT (for “homeostatically induced T cell”) mice (18). Circulating 
APP- reactive CD8 TRM cells were rapidly homeostatically expanded 
in hiT mice (SI Appendix, Fig. S1B), similar to the reported gradual 
expansion of age- related CD8 TRM cells in aging humans (21).
Aβ and Neurofibrillary Deposition. We examined T riton- soluble 
brain extracts as we previously described (22), to assess potentially 
toxic Aβ in hiT mice by western blot (WB) using 4G8 (human-  and 
rodent- specific APP/Aβ) and ab14220 (rodent- specific APP/Aβ) 
antibodies. This revealed relative upregulation of high molecular 
weight species presumed to be APP and its cleavage products 
(APPCl) in brains of wt- CD8 group hiT mice 3 and 10 wk after 
injection (Fig. 1A and SI Appendix, Fig. S2 A and B). Additional 
isoform-  and species- specific antibodies in ELISA revealed that 
endogenous Aβ1- 40 but not Aβ1- 42 was relatively increased in 
wt- CD8 group mice 10 wk postinjection (Fig. 1B), with WBs 
and tissue staining using 4G8 antibody (recognizing rodent 
and human Aβ/APP) confirming prominent amyloidosis in the 
cortex and hippocampus (SI Appendix, Fig. S2B and Fig. 1 C–F, 
respectively). By 6 mo postinjection, wt- CD8 and wt- CD8+CD4 
groups exhibited increased Aβ deposition in brain vasculature, 
whereas wt- CD4 group did not (Fig. 1 D and E and SI Appendix, 
Fig. S2 C and D), further suggesting CD8 T cells are necessary 
and sufficient to promote amyloidosis. Aβ plaques in wt- CD8 
group brains 15 mo postinjection exhibited typical morphology, 
but exhibited small compact cores at best, were chiefly detergent- 
soluble (SI  Appendix, Fig.  S3), and were minimally stained by 
curcumin or ThioS (Fig. 1 C and F).
Detergent- soluble phospho- tau (pTau) was slightly (30%) but 
significantly increased at 10 wk postinjection in the wt- CD8 
group forebrain, while pTau paired helical filaments (PHFs, which 
mature to form NFTs in AD) were increased nearly fivefold on 
WBs (Fig. 1 G and H). Starting at 6 mo postinjection, fibril- staining 
reagents (Gallyas silver, curcumin, and ThioS), each stained cel­
lular inclusions within the wt- CD8 group hippocampus (Fig. 1 
I–K and SI Appendix, Fig. S4A), with similar structures seen in 
simultaneously stained human AD cortex (SI Appendix, Fig. S4B), 
but not in brains of either AD- transgenic Tg2576 (AD- Tg) mice 
or AD- Tg rats (Fig. 1 I–K) (22). Tissue immunofluorescence (IF) 
for pTau, Aβ, and DAPI prior to Gallyas staining revealed these 
structures were derived from pTau + neurons with intact nuclei, 
and that silver staining was superimposable with that of pTau but 
not Aβ (Fig. 1L). These data suggest that the predominant T cells 
in hiT mice (which resemble resident- memory phenotype CD8 
T cells or CD8 TRM) promote coordinated and robust deposition 
of Aβ and fibrillar NFT- like inclusions in the mouse brain.
Immune and Neuroinflammatory Infiltration. Additional images  
support our previous findings that CD8 T cell infiltration, micro­
gliosis, and astrogliosis (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 A–C, D and E, and 
F–I, respectively), are exclusively seen in wt- CD8 group mice (18). 
Cerebral plaques in these animals were closely associated with 
gliosis, as is common in human AD (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 H and I).  
In brain regions containing both T and glial cells, Aβ plaque burden  
correlated more strongly with hippocampal CD8 T cell levels 
than astrocytic or microglial levels (SI Appendix, Fig. S5 J –L), 
suggesting a unique relationship between CD8 T cells and amyloid  
pathology.
Mechanisms of hiT Mouse Neuropathology. T o examine mechanisms 
of hiT cell mediated neuropathology, we injected PBS, or CD8 T cells 
from wild- type, Perforin 1- deficient, or IFNγ- deficient donors into 
young (6 to 8 wk) B6.Foxn1 hosts (PBS, wt- CD8, PrfKO- CD8, 
and IfnγKO- CD8 groups, respectively), and analyzed neuropathology 

=== PAGE 3 ===
PNAS  2024  Vol. 121  No. 29 e2401420121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 3 of 12
by ELISA or WB, as well as by tissue staining. CD8 T cells from all 
donor strains expanded in circulation of B6.Foxn1 recipients (18). In 
marked contrast to wt- CD8 or IfnγKO- CD8, however, PrfKO- CD8 
brains exhibited no significant increase in Aβ, plaques, pTau, PHFs, or 
NFT- like inclusions in any region. At 15 mo postinjection, Aβ1- 40 
was significantly elevated only in the wt- CD8 group brain by ELISA 
(Fig. 2A). Nevertheless, Aβ plaques and silver- stained neurons were 
evident within the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus by tissue IF in 
both wt- CD8 and IfnγKO- CD8 groups (Fig. 2B). Tau PHFs were 
also only elevated in wt- CD8 brains at 15 mo by WB (Fig. 2C), but 
Gallyas tissue staining of IfnγKO- CD8 brains similarly revealed NFT- 
like inclusions in the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus, but not in 
the cingulate cortex as in wt- CD8 group brains (Fig. 2D). Silver- stained 
neurons in IfnγKO- CD8 brain were derived from pTau+ neurons by 
sequential staining as shown for wt- CD8 brain (Fig. 2E). Aβ plaques in 
wt- CD8 and IfnγKO- CD8 group brains were of similar morphology 
(Fig. 2 F and G), but those in the IfnγKO- CD8 group were significantly 
smaller (Fig. 2 F and H) and appeared only in the entorhinal cortex 
and hippocampus but not in the cingulate cortex as in the wt- CD8 
group (Fig. 2B). These data suggested that blocking Perforin production 
completely prevented all overt AD- like pathology, while blocking IFNγ 
production led to smaller Aβ plaques and to limited distribution of 
NFT- like structures reminiscent of early- stage AD (23).
Neuronal Loss and Cerebral Atrophy.  T o determine whether 
neurodegeneration was evident in hiT mice, we stained and 
counted neurons positive for the neuron specific nuclear protein, 
NeuN, in CA1, CA2, and CA3 of the hippocampus. Brain 
mass was also assessed, and NeuN and synaptic protein signals 
quantified on WBs. Loss of NeuN+ cells in wt- CD8 group mice 
was visually apparent in hippocampal immunostains (Fig. 3 A and 
B), and was verified by NeuN+ cell counts at 15 mo postinjection 
(Fig. 3C). Loss of brain mass in the wt- CD8 group progressed 
from 5% at 6 mo, to 10% 15 mo postinjection (Fig.  3D), 
comparable to terminal brain atrophy in human AD (24). WBs 
of brains 15 mo postinjection confirmed proportional decreases 
in NeuN, the postsynaptic submembrane protein, drebrin, and 
the presynaptic vesicle protein, Synaptophysin (Fig. 3 E and F). 
Loss in brain mass correlated with decreased NeuN within PBS 
and CD8 injection groups, establishing a direct relationship 
A
B G H
C
DE
F
K
L
J
I
Fig. 1.   Amyloid and Tau pathology. WBs of APP (100 kDa) and its cleavage products (APP Cl; <100 kDa) in the brain using antibody 4G8 (upper blot; 10 wk 
postinjection) and ab14220 (lower blot; 3 wk postinjection) after T cell injection (→) into recipients (A). Expanded versions of these WBs are shown in SI Appendix, 
Fig. S2 A and B. Forebrain Aβ1- 40 ELISA in B6.Foxn1 recipients of PBS of wt- CD8 T cells 15 mo postinjection (B). 4G8- positive Plaques ± pTau/curcumin staining 
in brains of the above mice, and in 18- mo- old Tg2576 (AD- Tg) brain (C). ThioS staining of vasculature in the wt- CD8 group cortex (D), and 4G8 staining in the 
periventricular region (E) 6 mo postinjection. Representative plaque morphology and size in the wt- CD8 brain 15 mo postinjection (F). Forebrain pTau and Tau 
PHF WBs 10 wk postinjection (G), and compiled pTau and PHF values (H). Gallyas/silver- stained cells in hiT mouse groups 6 mo after i.v. control/cell injection, and 
in 14- mo- old Tg2576 (AD- Tg) mice (I). Hippocampal sections from the indicated groups (all B6.Foxn1 recipients, except AD- Tg = Tg2576 mice), were stained with 
4G8 (Aβ) and curcumin 6 mo postinjection, or at 14 mo of age for AD- Tg (J). Right- facing arrows highlight Aβ deposits with no curcumin costaining. Up- facing 
arrows depict colocalized Aβ and curcumin deposits. Down- facing arrows depict curcumin+ structures with no Aβ costaining, i.e., nonamyloid fibrillar deposits. No 
DAPI was used; blue background is provided for anatomical context. ThioS staining of dentate gyrus in the same hiT mice (PBS and wt- CD8 group mice 6 mo after 
control/cell injection), and in 20- mo- old AD- Tg rats (K). Individual and overlaid images of sequential 4G8 (green)/pTau (red) → Gallyas (black) stains in the wt- CD8 
group hippocampus 15 mo postinjection (L). Plots depict averages ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.005 by the two- sided T- test, relative to the PBS group.

=== PAGE 4 ===
4 of 12   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 pnas.org
between brain atrophy and neuronal loss (Fig. 3G). Significant 
brain loss was not observed in wt- CD4 group but was evident in 
wt- CD8+CD4 group, suggesting that CD4 T cells fail to either 
mediate or mitigate neuronal loss, or modulate its induction by 
CD8 T cells (SI Appendix, Fig. S6A).
Severe Cognitive Impairment. We assessed cognitive performance 
in hiT mice using three independent tests for learning and 
memory: contextual and cued FC, SAB in the Y- maze, and BM 
performance. Open- field testing (OFT) was performed prior to 
each of these three behavioral tests to rule out influences due to 
injection- associated mobility variations (Fig. 3H and SI Appendix, 
Fig. S7A), as well as to monitor motor dysfunction evident in 
other T cell- associated neurological conditions such as multiple 
sclerosis.
Significant motor deficits occurred with age but did not distin­
guish any groups including the PBS group from others (SI Appendix, 
Fig. S7A). In contrast, contextual FC was reduced in the wt- CD8 
group relative to PBS controls 6 mo after T cell injection, with 
both contextual and cued learning impaired at 11 mo (Fig. 3I). 
These results suggest that CD8 T cells in hiT mice alone mediate 
early damage to the hippocampus (required for contextual FC), 
with additional later damage to the amygdala (involved in cued 
FC). This progressive behavioral deficit pattern mimics one typical 
of cognitive decline in human AD (25). Intriguingly, only cued 
learning was impaired in wt- CD8+CD4 but not wt- CD4 group 
mice at the earlier time point (SI Appendix, Fig. S6B), suggesting 
that CD4 T cells modulate whether the hippocampus or amygdala 
is damaged first in hiT mice, but neither induce cognitive decline 
themselves nor alter the ability of CD8 T cells to do so.
SAB in the Y- maze is a well- established assay for hippocampal 
integrity (26, 27), based on the preference of mice to alternately 
explore two alleys. The lowest possible score (50%) indicates ran­
dom alley choice, due to either no working memory of the previ­
ous alley entered, or complete lack of preference. SAB testing 12 
mo postinjection revealed a score of 55 to 56% in PBS controls, 
comparable to wild- type mice (28), but was reduced to 50% in 
the wt- CD8 group (Fig. 3J). This is consistent with an absence of 
working memory in the wt- CD8 group.
BM testing was performed at 14 mo postinjection and repre­
sents a more focused measure of hippocampus- dependent learning 
and memory. This test is not confounded by decreased ability to 
swim, or stress- induced behaviors caused by swim tests (29). 
Relative to PBS controls, wt- CD8 mice showed no ability to learn 
the maze over the initial 4- d training period (Fig. 3K). Given this 
initial learning deficit, it was not surprising that wt- CD8 mice 
were also profoundly impaired in subsequent memory retention 
and reversal phases of the maze (Fig. 3 L–N).
Contextual FC at 6 and 11 mo correlated with brain mass 
(SI Appendix, Fig. S7B), as did latency to solve the BM (SI Appendix, 
Fig. S7C), further underscoring the relationship of cognitive decline 
to physical neurodegeneration. Poor performance of hiT mice on 
BM (total latency below median = BMlo) also exhibited significant 
association with increased pTau PHFs exclusively (SI Appendix, 
Fig. S7D), but not with any form of Aβ or detergent- soluble pTau 
(SI Appendix, Fig. S7 E and F).
Taken together, these three independent tests suggest that fully 
functional CD8 T cells in hiT mice mediate severe, progressive 
impairment of hippocampus- dependent learning and memory 
independent of locomotor activity, and that both the progressive 
15 mos
A
4G8B urden
B
15 mos
C
Silver-stained cells
D
A/g69pmol/g brain
% fluorescence
TauW Bs ignal
% posn eurons
A/g6940
A/g6942
pTau
TauP HF
E
Ifn/g74/g74KO-CD8
F
amorphous       round               hollow   
4G8-pTau-DAPI
G H
amorph round ho
llow
0
20
40
60
% plaque morphology
wt-CD8
IfnγKO-CD8
wt-CD8
IfnγKO-
CD
8
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
plaque diameter (/g80m) /uni2731/uni2731/uni2731
Fig. 2.   Amyloid and Tau pathology in hiT mice with T cell functional inhibition. Compiled Aβ ELISA (A), 4G8 plaque burden (B) pTau and PHF signal (pS199/202 
antibody [Invitrogen] used for pTau in WBs and tissue staining; Phospho- PHF- tau pSer202+Thr205 Antibody [AT8] used for Tau PHF in WBs) (C). Gallyas silver- 
stained cells in PBS, wt- CD8, PrfKO- CD8, and IfnγKO- CD8 hiT recipients 15 mo after control/cell injection and in 18- mo- old Tg2576 (AD- Tg) brain regions (D). Gallyas+ 
neurons from the IfnγKO- CD8 group cortex (E). Representative plaque morphology and size (F and G) in IfnγKO- CD8 brain 15 mo postinjection, and comparison 
to plaque size in the wt- CD8 group (H). Plots depict averages ± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.005 by the two- sided T- test, relative to the PBS group.

=== PAGE 5 ===
PNAS  2024  Vol. 121  No. 29 e2401420121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 5 of 12
pattern of cognitive loss and its association with cerebral pathology 
in the hiT model mirrors features typical of clinical AD (30).
Neuronal and cognitive loss differences were also evident 
between wt- CD8 and KO- CD8 groups: Neither IfnγKO - CD8 
nor PrfKO- CD8 brains showed significant evidence of neuronal 
loss, and both were indistinguishable from PBS controls in level 
of spontaneous alternation (Fig. 3J). IfnγKO- CD8 mice, however, 
appeared initially similar to PBS controls in the training sessions 
of the BM, but became more similar to the impaired wt- CD8 
group mice at many of the later stages (Fig. 3 K–N). This suggests 
that both IFNγ and PRF1 deficiency eliminates robust neuronal 
loss and either subdues cognitive decline (in IfnγKO- CD8 group) 
or eliminates it altogether (in PrfKO- CD8 group).
Reduction of Doublecortin (DCX) + Neurons in hiT Mice.  The 
dramatic impact of PRF1 deficiency on all aspects of AD- like 
neurodegeneration is most consistent with a direct role for lytic 
elimination of neural cells by CD8 T cells in the hiT mouse 
Latency( sec)
activity
normalized freezing
%s pont alt
%m arkera rea
relb rain mass
NeuN+ cells
GFAP-NeuN
NeuN
SYNP
Drebrin
GAPDH
PBS    wt-CD8
brain mass
NeuN
Drebrin
SYNP
350
400
450
500
550
0.11 10
r= 0.95
P <0 .05
NeuN WB signal
Brainm ass( mg)
A B C D
E F G
H I J
K L M N
Fig. 3.   Neurodegeneration and cognition in nude mice harboring hiT cells. Cell/control recipients in all panels are B6.Foxn1 exclusively. NeuN and GFAP staining 
(A and B), and cell counts in the hippocampus, 15 mo after cell/control injection (C). Brain atrophy over time in PBS and wt- CD8 groups (mass normalized to PBS 
controls at each time point; D). Representative forebrain westerns (E), and GAPDH- normalized NeuN, drebrin, and synaptophysin (SYNP) western signals (F).  
Correlation of NeuN with brain weight (G). Plots depict averages ± SEM. *P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, ***P < 0.005 by the two- sided T- test, relative to the PBS group. 
Representative open- field test at 13 mo (H). Fear conditioning (FC) over time (I), and spontaneous alternation behavior (SAB) at 12 mo (J). Barnes maze (BM) 
learning/training (K), retention (L), and reversal (M and N) phases, at 14 mo (black, colored symbols = P relative to PBS, wt- CD8, respectively). Plots depict averages 
± SEM. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.005 by two- sided ANOVA (panel K) or two- sided T- test (all others), relative to the PBS group unless otherwise indicated.

=== PAGE 6 ===
6 of 12   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 pnas.org
model. CD8 T cells normally reside in the brain, including 
those of C57BL/6 mice (31). These cells require expression of 
MHC I on their targets to eliminate them in an antigen- specific 
manner. Most neuronal lineage cells are MHC I- negative unless 
induced by cytokines such as IFNγ, but catecholaminergic 
neurons within the locus coeruleus (32) and neural progenitors 
constitutively express MHC I (33). T o determine whether 
these cells were eliminated early and independent of IFNγ, we 
examined Doublecortin(DCX)- positive neural progenitors within 
the subventricular zone (SVZ) of mature (6- mo- old) wild- type 
C57BL/6 mice, as well as in wt- CD8 and IfnγKO- CD8 group 
hiT mice 15 mo postinjection. CD8 T cells were observed in close 
proximity to DCX+ neural progenitors in the SVZ rostral migratory 
stream of wild- type C57BL/6 mice, consistent with the possibility 
that CD8 T cells might directly eliminate these cells under disease 
conditions (SI Appendix, Fig. S8A). Accordingly, DCX+ neurons 
were dramatically decreased in SVZ and throughout the brain in 
wt- CD8 and IfnγKO- CD8 group hiT mice (SI Appendix, Fig. S8 
B and C). Thus, even in the absence of more widespread neuronal 
loss (as in the IfnγKO - CD8 group), CD8 T cells in hiT mice 
promoted DCX + neural progenitor elimination. This suggests 
that neuronal lineage cells that constitutively express MHC I are 
eliminated first by hiT cells.
RNAseq Analysis on Brains of hiT Mice. T o gain further mechanistic 
insights into how CD8 T cells in hiT mice promote AD- like 
pathology, we performed RNAseq analysis on mouse forebrains 
from experimental and control groups. Focusing on changes ≥10% 
relative to PBS, each of wt- CD8, IfnγKO- CD8, and PrfKO- CD8 
groups exhibited significant upregulation of the T cell- specific 
marker, CD3ε, while they also altered 1,947, 309, and 1,901 
additional transcripts, respectively (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 A–J). Since 
upregulation of CD3ε was at odds with our previous observation 
that CD8 T cells were undetectable in PrfKO- CD8 group brain 
by tissue staining (18), we reexamined T cells in this group using 
potentially more sensitive flow cytometric analysis (SI Appendix, 
Fig. S10). We confirmed significant accumulation of CD8 T cells 
in PrfKO- CD8 group brain relative to control B6.Foxn1, albeit 
lower than in wild- type C57BL/6 controls previously reported as 
comparable to the wt- CD8 group (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 A  and 
B) (18). Thus, all groups injected with CD8 T cells harbored 
elevated levels of those cells in the brain, consistent with their 
CD8ε mRNA upregulation. This provides relevant context for 
further gene expression analysis.
T wo gene expression pathways were prominently altered in the 
wt- CD8 group exclusively: BioPlanet AD and a group of largely 
overlapping pathways related to cytoplasmic ribosomal proteins and 
translation (SI Appendix, Figs. S9H and S11 A–C). In addition, a 
group of largely overlapping pathways related to electron transport 
chain and oxidative phosphorylation was up- regulated in both 
wt- CD8 and IfnγKO- CD8 but not PrfKO- CD8 brain (SI Appendix, 
Figs. S9H and S11 A–C), and as such was uniquely associated with 
both delayed/arrested and later AD- like neuropathology. Electron 
transport chain-  and ribosomal protein- related pathways are known 
to be involved in CD8 T cell- mediated effector activity as well as 
AD pathophysiology, and IFNγ is also known to modulate riboso­
mal proteins (34). Within cell type- specific genes, only neuronal 
genes exhibited net upregulation, whereas most nonneuronal genes 
were down- regulated (Fig. 4A). Moreover, multiple pathways impli­
cated in AD were affected in the wt- CD8 group (SI Appendix, 
Figs. S9 H–J and S12). T o further determine relevance of these 
modest changes to AD, we focused on 82 genes identified in prior 
genome- wide epidemiological studies (“GWAS genes”) (35) whose 
AD- associated variants often manifest as subtle expression changes. 
Among this GWAS subset, 14, 2, and 11 genes were significantly 
altered in wt- CD8, IfnγKO- CD8, and PrfKO- CD8 groups, respec­
tively, with 8 and 1 of these also altered in wt- CD8 and IfnγKO- CD8 
groups respectively, relative to PrfKO- CD8 (P = 0.034; two- sided 
Fisher’s exact test; Fig. 4B). Known functions of GWAS genes 
altered in wt- CD8 and PrfKO- CD8 brains included multiple bio­
logical pathways implicated in AD, including Aβ/Tau pathology 
gene expression and cell signaling, endocytosis, inflammation/
immunity, and lipid/cholesterol metabolism (SI Appendix, Fig. S9 
H and J), whereas those altered in IfnγKO- CD8 brains covered a 
more restricted subset involved in Aβ/Tau pathology and inflam­
mation/immunity. This supports a model in which Perforin controls 
a critical disease- initiating event reflected by electron transport chain 
gene modulation, whereas IFNγ modulates most other gene expres­
sion risk factors that may worsen disease pace, assure disease pro­
gression, and/or increase disease severity (Fig. 4C).
hiT Cell Metrics in Human AD.  Given the varied impact of CD8 
T cells on different rodent models of hereditary neurodegeneration, 
it was imperative that the potential impact of hiT analogues was 
examined in human patients. We first examined levels of the 
larger “parental” memory/aging (KLRG1 +) CD8 population in 
blood, and then the APP- specific KLRG1+ CD8 subpopulation 
derived from it, by flow cytometry in HLA- A2+ individuals 
from two separate cohorts (Fig. 5 A–F, with gating parameters 
in SI Appendix, Figs. S13 and S15A). As expected, the parental 
KLRG1+ CD8 population increased with age while KLRG1-  CD8 
cells did not (SI Appendix, Fig. S14). The KLRG1+ subpopulation 
also exhibited slight expansion in age- related cognitive decline or 
MCI- AD (Fig. 5 B and D; and SI Appendix, Fig. S15 B and C,  
with representative gating shown in SI  Appendix, Fig.  S15A). 
By contrast, APP- specific KLRG1+ CD8 T cells were markedly 
decreased in MCI and/or AD (Fig. 5 C and D), and this trend was 
maintained in both females and males (SI  Appendix, Fig.  S16 A and B).  
The decrease in APP- specific KLRG1+ CD8 T cells correlated 
with poor cognitive performance in both cohorts independent of 
age (Fig. 5 E and F), exhibiting a linear correlation in the cohort 
subjected to the more sensitive MoCA test (Fig. 5E).
Cytolytic and antigen- specific T cell markers in AD brains were 
next examined (Fig. 5 A and G–J). Upregulation of Perforin1 in 
the AD brain was evident in two independent patient cohorts, 
corresponded with CD8 upregulation on WBs, and exhibited the 
expected punctate (endocytic) cellular pattern by tissue IF (Fig. 5 
G and H). Similarly, T cells stained by CD8 and APP- specific 
pHLA multimers were more prevalent by tissue IF in the AD brain 
from the UCD cohort, despite no prescreening of specimens for 
HLA- A2 to which the APP- specific multimer binds (Fig. 5 I and 
J). Taken together, these data suggest that parental KLRG1+ CD8 
T cells accumulate with aging in blood. By contrast, APP- specific 
KLRG1+ CD8 T cells in blood decrease in proportion to cognitive 
decline in AD and prodromal conditions, just as they accumulate 
in the AD brain.
Decreased APP- specific KLRG1+ CD8 T cells in blood corre­
lated significantly with reduced Aβ1- 42 and increased total Tau 
(but only marginally with p- tau181) in CSF within the largest 
patient cohort (UA; Fig. 6A), suggesting correspondence with 
existing AD biomarkers. Levels of parental KLRG1+ CD8 T cells 
also correlated uniquely with CSF Aβ1- 42 in AD patients inde­
pendent of age (Fig. 6B). While neither parental nor APP- specific 
CD8 cells correlated linearly with MMSE (as with MoCA) (Fig. 6 
A and B), the latter did exhibit a correlation with hi/lo MMSE 
score (Fig. 5F). The lower sensitivity of MMSE vs. MoCA in 
detecting cognitive impairment may account for this difference 
(36). Overall, these trends suggested association of age- related 

=== PAGE 7 ===
PNAS  2024  Vol. 121  No. 29 e2401420121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 7 of 12
CD8 T cell dynamics with some of the most specific established 
AD biomarkers, hinting at potential AD biomarker utility for 
both parental CD8 TRM and APP- specific subpopulations.
T o test this, we first examined publicly accessible data for multiple 
CD8 TRM markers in blood from independent patient cohorts 
(CD3D/E, TCRZ, CD8A/CD8B, CD103, CD122, CD127, 
CD44, as available in database). Using GFAP as an up- regulated 
standard (SI Appendix, Fig. S17 A and B), or simply compared to 
normal aging controls (SI Appendix, Fig. S17 C and D), we verified 
significant upregulation of multiple CD8 TRM markers at various 
stages of AD in two independent cohorts, with CD8 and TCRZ 
genes up- regulated at the earliest stage of AD in a severity- graded 
cohort (SI Appendix, Fig. S17B). We separated the largest of these 
cohorts into T cell high and low groups based on median CD3 
expression to exclude patients with age- related T cell lymphopenia, 
and excluded those under 65 to eliminate potentially confounding 
early- onset AD patients and young controls (SI Appendix, Fig. S6D). 
Comodulation of CD103, CD44, and CD8A as a group, as well 
as levels of CD103 alone, exhibited intriguing biomarker potential 
in ROC plots (Fig. 6C). In addition, APP- specific KLRG1+ CD8 
T cell levels quantified by flow cytometry exhibited even better 
biomarker potential than CD8 TRM genes (Fig. 6D), corresponding 
better to MCI- AD than the highly touted plasma biomarker, 
pTau- 217 (SI Appendix, Fig. S17 A–C), corresponded to AD itself 
(37). This demonstrates that the APP- specific CD8 T cell subpop­
ulation and its parental KLRG1+ population are uniquely modu­
lated in AD, and suggests that their levels may be useful and 
potentially superior disease biomarkers.
Discussion
The hiT mouse model demonstrated several key features reminis­
cent of AD in humans. These included coupled accumulation of 
amyloid plaques and NFT- like fibrillar inclusions in tau+ neurons, 
as well as robust neuronal loss and profound cognitive decline, 
each demonstrated by at least three separate methodologies. 
B
A
C
3-PBS
16-PBS
4-PBS
9-PBS
11-wtCD8
13-wtCD8
12-wtCD8
15-wtCD8
9-PBS
16-PBS
3-PBS
4-PBS
3-PBS
16-PBS
4-PBS
9-PBS
6-Ifn/g74/g74KO-CD8
7-Ifn/g74/g74KO-CD8
10-Ifn/g74/g74KO-CD8
8-Ifn/g74/g74KO-CD8
1-Prf1KO-CD8
14-Prf1KO-CD8
2-Prf1KO-CD8
wt-CD8 Ifn/g74/g74KO-CD8 Prf1KO-CD8
Fig. 4.   Gene expression changes in the hiT mouse brain. RNAseq analysis on hiT and control forebrains. Most cell type- specific genes were down- regulated with 
the exception of neuron- specific genes (A). Differentially regulated genes among 84 AD- associated loci from GWAS; bolded black font depicts genes uniquely 
regulated in each group (B). Mechanistic model of gene, pathway, and disease induction by hiT cells based on combined pathological, knockout, and gene 
expression analysis (C). Abbreviations: CD8, cluster of differentiation antigen 8; Peptide Ag, peptide antigen; APP, Amyloid Precursor Protein; MHC I (HLA), major 
histocompatibility complex class I protein (Human Leukocyte Antigen); PRF1, Perforin 1 protein; IFNγ, Interferon- gamma (proinflammatory) cytokine; GZMB, 
Granzyme B (lytic) protein.

=== PAGE 8 ===
8 of 12   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 pnas.org
This combination of AD- like features has not previously been 
induced in animal models by a single factor or transgene, as 
rodents typically fail to develop either NFT- like inclusions or 
robust neuronal loss without the addition of transgenes unrelated 
to human AD (1, 38, 39). hiT mice also exhibited finer features 
often seen in human AD, including cognitive loss progressing 
from hippocampus-  to amygdala- dependent tasks over time (25), 
progressive brain atrophy related to neuronal loss, unique associ­
ation of cognitive loss with fibrillar tau pathology (30), and mod­
ulation of multiple risk- associated genes.
Mechanistically, Perforin 1 in CD8 T cells was required for all 
aspects of neurodegenerative pathology, with the exception of most 
gene expression alterations. While this potentially involved the 
target- lysis function of Perforin in T cells, we’d previously reported 
that Perforin also precluded the accumulation of T cells in brains 
of hiT mice (18), a finding inconsistent with the minimal impact 
on gene expression Perforin knockout conferred on hiT mouse 
brains. Follow- up analysis showed that Prf1KO CD8 T cells did 
in fact accumulate and remain in hiT brains long term, but at lower 
levels than wild- type CD8 T cells. While this offers an explanation 
for the changes in brain gene expression seen in Prf1KO- CD8 
group mice, it does not discount the possibility that lower levels 
of brain T cells could be a contributing factor in the lack of 
neuropathology observed in this group, particularly given that 
Perforin deficiency has been implicated in clinical disorders of 
T cell tissue homeostasis previously (40).
By contrast to Perforin 1, IFNγ in CD8 T cells promoted wide­
spread neuronal loss and cognitive decline in hiT mice and 
increased the distribution and size of amyloid plaques. This par­
allels the impact of this cytokine on mouse models of amyloidosis 
(41). On a molecular level, Perforin1 is known to promote mito­
chondrial ROS and oxidative stress (very early events in AD) by 
facilitating Granzyme- mediated disruption of the electron trans­
port chain in target cells (42, 43). Perforin 1 also promotes inter­
nalization of Aβ in neurons (44). IFNγ on the other hand is a 
well- known proinflammatory effector, as well as a potent modu­
lator of gene expression in cells expressing its receptor (45). The 
distinct involvement of these two genes is thus consistent with 
Perforin- mediated attack of neurons by hiT cells, which simulta­
neously initiates limited neurodegeneration, mitochondrial oxi­
dative stress, and inflammatory cytokine production in the brain. 
IFNγ accelerates progression of the neuropathology, likely through 
induction of MHC I and modulation of multiple risk- associated 
genes. CD4 T cells appear to play a dispensable role in induction 
and progression of neuropathology in hiT mice, but appear to 
subtly influence the brain region damaged by CD8 hiT cells, to 
CTR
L
MCI 
-no
rm bi
o
MCI - A
Dbio AD
0
20
40
60
80
100
% KLRG1+ CD8T cells
/uni2731/uni2731
/uni2731
/uni2731
CD
8
KL
RG1+ CD
8
KLRG1-
CD8
Ag-specifi
c K
LRG1
+CD8
0
10
20
30
40
% PBMC
cogn normal
age-relc ognd ecline
mild cogn impaired( MCI)
* *
*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
20 25 30
MOCA score
%A PP-specK LRG1+C D8 Tc ells r= 0.828
P =0 .003
D
COHORT 1
Blood,
flow
cytometry
U. Antwerp( b, c, f)
CSMC (d,e )
COHORT 3
Brain,
Westernb lot,
tissueI F
UC Davis( g-i)
W. LosA ngeles VA (g,h )
COHORT 2
Cognitive
testing
CSMC (e)
U. Antwerp( f)
CTRL
MCI 
- n
orm bi
o
MCI 
-ADbio AD
0
5
10
15
20
25
% pathogenic aged CD8T cells
P =0 .00001
P =0 .00008
P =0 .02
G
normal
AD
0
1
2
3
4
%A reaP RF1
%APP(471-479)-specificTcell s
no
rmal
AD
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
20 40 60 80
AGE
A
r=  -0.146
P =0 .687
%A PP-speciﬁc CD8T cells
37 kDa
75 kDa
*
*********
* *
%A PP-specK LRG1+C D8 Tc ells
%K LRG1+ CD8 Tc ells
% APP-specific
KLRG1+ CD8 Tc ells
BC
%A PP-specific
KLRG1+ CD8T cells
E
MoCA score AGE
% PBMC
% APP-specific
CD8T cells
MMSE
< 2
5
MM
SE
> 24
0
5
10
% APP-specific
CD8T cells( -neg ctrl)
P =0 .03
AGE < 
76
AG
E > 75
0
5
10
P =0 .08F
%A reaP RF1
H IF UCDp atients WB WLAVA patients
I
CTRL
AD
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
*****
CSMC patients (MCI)U Ap atients( AD)
CSMC patients
UA patients UA patients
J IF UCDp atients
Fig. 5.   hiT parameters in human Alzheimer’s. Patient cohorts: University of Antwerp = “UA”; Cedars- Sinai Medical Center = “CSMC”; University of California, Davis 
= “UCD”; West Los Angeles Veteran’s Administration Hospital = “WLAVA” (A). KLRG1 + (B) and APP(471–479)/HLA- A2- reactive KLRG1+ (C) CD8 T cells in CTRL, MCI ± 
CSF AD biomarkers (MCI, MCI–AD), and verified Alzheimer’s (AD) blood. T cell subpopulations vs. MoCA score (D), and correlation of APP(471–479)/HLA- A2- reactive 
KLRG1+ CD8 with Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) score and age (with negative pHLA multimer staining subtracted; significance of both APP- specific T cells and 
age with MMSE score was increased without such subtraction, with P = 0.01 and 0.02, respectively) (E and F). PRF1 WB and IF representative examples of PRF1 
staining in presumptive vesicles with or without (arrows) costained Aβ ( G), with compiled IF and WB quantifications in age- matched CTRL and AD brains (H).  
Representative APP(471- 479)/HLA- A2- reactive CD8 staining (I) and compiled quantification (J) in the brain. Plots depict averages ± SEM. *P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01,  
***P < 0.005, ****P < 0.001 by the two- sided T- test, relative to CTRL unless otherwise indicated.

=== PAGE 9 ===
PNAS  2024  Vol. 121  No. 29 e2401420121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 9 of 12
the extent that it resembles a distinct AD behavioral subtype (46). 
While intriguing, rigorous validation of this working molecular 
mechanism requires further study.
The apparent arrest of IfnγKO - CD8 group mice at a stage 
resembling early AD made them attractive to examine potential 
targets of T cell elimination in the absence of more widespread 
neuronal loss. CD8 T cells require MHC I on target cells to rec­
ognize and destroy them, but only small anatomically restricted 
subpopulations of neuronal lineage cells constitutively express 
MHC I without induction by cytokines such as IFNγ. Such cells 
include catecholaminergic neurons within locus coeruleus (32), 
among the earliest sites affected by AD neuropathology (47). 
Neuroblasts mediate adult neurogenesis, a process thought to be 
critically impaired very early in AD, and also constitutively express 
MHC I (33, 48). The elimination of Doublecortin (DCX)+ neu­
roblasts by CD8 T cells in the IfnγKO- CD8 group suggests that 
neuronal lineage cells constitutively expressing MHC I are initial 
targets of CD8 T cell elimination in the hiT model, while more 
widespread neurodegeneration requires production of IFNγ, a 
known inducer of MHC I on distinct neural cells (45).
While several aspects of the hi T model paralleled features of 
human AD, it is not a perfect phenocopy of the disease. For example, 
Aβ1–40 and diffuse plaques predominate in hiT mice, whereas 
Aβ1–42 and compact plaques typically predominate in most forms 
of human AD. In addition, “ghost” tangles—remnants of NFTs in 
dead neurons—were not seen in hiT mice. Both these differences 
may well be explained by hiT mouse pathology occurring in the 
context of the endogenous mouse rather than transgenic human 
Aβ-  and/or tau- encoding genes. Rodents, for example, are known 
to be deficient in clearing endogenous Aβ1–42, and exhibit Aβ1–40 
preference in amyloid fibril formation (49, 50), which could favor 
diffuse plaque and Aβ1–40 predominance in hiT mice. Similarly, 
the absence of ghost tangles is likely due to the virtual absence of 
the ghost tangle- promoting isoforms of MAPT , the gene encoding 
tau proteins, in adult mice (51). In addition, the hiT model was 
analyzed exclusively in female mice due to concerns over male- specific 
autoimmune dynamics in related strains (19, 20). This rendered our 
finding that human APP- specific CD8 T cell levels are associated 
with AD in both males and females a critical observation.
Reports of rodents exhibiting neurodegeneration linked to amy­
loid and fibrillar tau pathology have been published previously, 
most notably upon infection of mice with Porphyromonas gingivalis 
(52). Introduction of multiple AD- associated human Aβ- related 
transgenes into rats (AD- Tg rats) has similarly been reported to 
produce neurodegeneration with NFT- like silver- stained neurons, 
although this model appears more relevant to dominantly inherited 
AD (22). Evidence of NFTs in both these models, however, was 
extremely limited, reliant on single staining reagents, and not sta­
tistically validated. For this reason, we sought to include one of 
these models as a control for NFT- like structures. In our hands, 
A
B
C D
Fig. 6.   CD8 TRM biomarker potential in human Alzheimer’s. Correlation of APP(471–479)/HLA- A2- reactive KLRG1+ CD8 levels with Aβ1- 42, total- tau, and P- tau181 in 
CSF, and with MMSE score in all AU patients combined (A), and correlation of parental KLRG+CD8+ T cells with these parameters in AU Alzheimer’s patients only 
(note: several higher APP- specific T cell levels were in control patients that were not subjected to MMSE testing) (B). Combined variance of T RM markers, CD8A, 
CD44, and CD103 yielded the indicated areas under the curve (AUC) in Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) plots of T cell- high and T cell- low samples from a 
publicly available patient dataset (C). AUC was not significantly altered when CD103 variance was used alone in this cohort (0.781, T cell- high; 0.548, T cell- low). ROC 
plots of APP(471–479)/HLA- A2 multimer- reactive KLRG1+ CD8 T cells in blood relative to normal aging controls, both from UA cohort (D). Mild Cognitive Impairment 
without (MCI- normal bio) and with (MCI- AD bio) CSF biomarkers consistent with AD, and confirmed AD patients ages 57 to 84 (AD- all). AD- age- matched indicates 
ROC analysis on 10 AD patients for whom precisely age- matched controls were available (±1 y; n = 10). P < 0.001 for all curves except MCI – normal bio (P = 0.003).

=== PAGE 10 ===
10 of 12   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 pnas.org
however, NFT- like structures failed to appear in the same AD- Tg 
rat model under staining procedures that readily revealed NFTs in 
hiT mice and human AD brains alike. Further, neither infection 
nor transgenic models have offered mechanistic explanations for 
anatomically specific disease etiology, generated pathophysiology 
corresponding to well- defined aspects of human AD progression, 
or demonstrated translational relevance more generally.
In addition to mirroring gross and fine aspects of human AD, 
hiT mice successfully predicted that CD8 TRM- marker genes and 
Perforin protein are up- regulated in the AD brain. Similarly, the 
model successfully predicted that APP- specific CD8 T cell levels 
would correspond to disease status in both females and males with 
AD and related MCI, as well as to cognitive decline in multiple 
cohorts. Finally, observations in hiT mice led to the prediction 
that levels of hiT cell analogues in blood would constitute uniquely 
useful tools for the clinical management of AD, with their utility 
for AD diagnosis particularly highlighted in this study.
While the hiT mouse model is perhaps not the first to replicate 
key aspects of AD via an inductive factor upstream of Aβ (39), it 
does so without the use of transgenes not associated with the 
human disease. More importantly, it exhibits clear translational 
relevance to sporadic AD. As such, it helps to dispel some of the 
confusion that surrounds the role of T cells in Alzheimer’s and 
related neurodegenerative diseases. Critically, the hiT model repro­
duced compelling AD- like characteristics through introduction of 
age- related T cells and without deterministic transgenes. Functional 
impairment of the T cells attenuated AD- like features, and their 
analogues were uniquely associated with human AD. Thus, three 
critical criteria for causation (disease recapitulation by agent intro­
duction into animals, disease mitigation upon impairment of 
agent, and preferential association of agent dynamics to human 
disease) appear satisfied by this model. Nevertheless, the exclusive 
use of female nude mice qualifies such a conclusion and opens the 
possibility that additional factors associated with gender and/or 
mouse strain genetics could also impact neurodegenerative induc­
tion. Similarly, human AD may in fact possess multiple distinct 
inductive events or processes. Hence, it will be critical for future 
studies to discern the extent to which hiT cells and related events 
contribute to AD induction and in what proportion of patients 
they do so.
Conservatively, however, our study reveals evidence for the exist­
ence of a discrete and clinically useful factor upstream of Aβ that 
may contribute to amyloid-  and tau- associated neurodegeneration. 
Further assessment of the potential of hiT cell metrics as diagnostic 
biomarkers for human AD nevertheless requires multicenter vali­
dation, prospective and longitudinal analyses that include more 
extensive non- AD dementia cohorts. It will be equally important 
to determine whether modulation of antigen- specific hiT cell pres­
ence or function can alter the course of AD- like neurodegeneration 
in therapeutic studies and determine whether effective treatments 
for AD critically modulate these cells in humans. Finally, continued 
examination of hiT mice on multiple strain backgrounds, and har­
boring risk factors for AD or other age- related disorders, may lead 
to a more comprehensive understanding of age- related disease 
biology, pathology, and immune characteristics more generally.
Materials and Methods
Animal Subjects. Female C57BL/6, B6.Foxn1 mice, and congenic and/or syn-
geneic knockout strains were housed in a pathogen–free vivarium under stand-
ard conditions on a 12- h light/12- h dark cycle. Recipient animals were 8-  to 
10- wk- old female B6.Foxn1 mice; donors were 5-  to 8- wk- old female C57BL/6 
or B6.CD45.1 congenic mice. Numbers of animals used per test are specified in 
SI Appendix, Table S1.
Adoptive Transfer of T Cells. Splenic CD8+ T cells from C57BL/6J female donors 
(5 to 8 wk old) were purified using anti- CD8 or anti- CD4 immunobeads (Miltenyi 
Biotech, Sunnyvale, CA). 3 × 106 purified CD8 or CD4 T cells, or 3 × 10 6 native 
splenocytes for CD8+CD4 T cell hosts, were intravenously injected in 50 µL of PBS 
into female B6.Foxn1 nude hosts. Cell numbers were based on prior publications 
demonstrating homeostatic expansion at similar doses (18, 53, 54). Transfer effi-
ciency into B6.Foxn1 hosts was validated by persistence of ≥5% CD8+, CD4+, or 
both, T cells within splenic lymphocytes 3 wk after injection (18).
Tissue Processing. The brain and spleen were harvested from mice and perfused 
with saline under deep anesthesia using a ketamine and xylazine (40 to 50 mg/kg 
i.p.) cocktail. Whole brains were weighed after removal of the cerebellum, brain-
stem, and olfactory bulb. Right hemispheres were flash frozen at −80 °C for protein 
studies, and homogenized. Cell lysates were separated into detergent- soluble 
and detergent- insoluble fractions. Left hemispheres were immersion fixed in 4% 
paraformaldehyde for 24 to 48 h and used for immunohistochemical staining.
Antibodies for Tissue Staining and WB Analyses.  Brain sections were 
mounted on slides and incubated at 4 °C overnight with primary antibody in block-
ing buffer, rinsed, and incubated 90 min in fluorochrome-  or biotin- conjugated 
secondary antibody, with or without curcumin, or with ThioS alone. Sections 
were mounted with DAPI (Invitrogen) unless otherwise indicated, and images 
analyzed with ImageJ (NIH). Antibodies used: anti- Aβ/APP antibody (ab14220; 
clone 4G8\); Anti- pTau pS199/202 antibody (Invitrogen) and AT8; β- actin (clone 
AC- 74, Sigma) due to cross- reactivity of GAPDH with IgG H chain (55); GAPDH 
used as control for all other markers; anti- GFAP (Dako); anti- NeuN antibody 
(Chemicon); anti- Iba1 (Wako, Ltd.); anti- CD8 (clone 53- 6.72, BD Pharmingen); 
anti- doublecortin (DCX; polyclonal sc- 8066, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); second-
ary antibodies (HRP , Alexa Flour- 488, - 594, - 647; Invitrogen). control HLA- A2 
and custom APP epitope dextramers (predicted affinity < 100 nM per NetMHC 
version 3.4 [APP(471–479)/HLA- A2], were manufactured by Immudex.
WB for Amyloid, Tau, Neural, and Immunological Markers. Triton- soluble 
cell lysates were electrophoresed and blotted onto 0.2 µm nitrocellulose. 
Membranes were blocked and incubated in primary and secondary antibodies 
1 h at room temperature with ≥3 washes between each, developed with ECL 
(GE Healthcare Biosciences; Pittsburgh, PA), and exposed onto Hyperfilm. WBs 
were performed a minimum of three times with comparable results per antibody. 
Bands were quantified using ImageJ software and expressed as (% area of test 
band)/(average % area of control bands).
ELISA. Supernatant from homogenized brain was used for Triton- soluble Aβ. 
Insoluble pellets from Triton- homogenized brain were resuspended in 10 
volumes 5M guanidine HCl 4 h to generate guanidine- soluble Aβ. Triton-  and 
guanidine- soluble samples were subjected to analysis using species-  and 
isoform- specific antibodies in Soluble and Insoluble Aβ ELISA kits (Invitrogen, Life 
Technologies). Absorbance was read on a SPECTRAmax Plus384 microplate reader 
(Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) and data analyzed in Graphpad PRISM. ELISAs 
were carried out a minimum of three times with comparable results per antibody/
kit, with samples tested in triplicate and standard curves included on each plate.
Flow Cytometry. Lymphocytes stained with respective antibodies were analyzed 
by three- color flow cytometry. Flow cytometry was performed with CD8- APC, HLA- 
A2- PerCP- Cy5.5, KLRG1- FITC antibodies (all Biolegend), and MHC A*0201- PE 
(Immudex) dextramers on a FACSCanto flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San 
Jose, CA). Antibodies and multimers were incubated with whole- blood single- 
cell suspension in PBS with 2% FBS, on ice for 30 min, washed, and analyzed. 
FSC vs SSC was used to distinguish between lymphocytes and dead cells/debris, 
with exclusion of cell multiplets. 100,000 to 300,000 flow events were acquired 
and analyzed. FlowJo software was used for data analysis using identical gating 
(shown in SI Appendix, Figs. S13 and S15A).
Gallyas Silver Staining. Free floating brain sections were placed in 5% periodic acid 
3 min, washed 2×, and placed in silver iodide solution 1 min, followed by incuba-
tion in 0.5% acetic acid 5 min (2×), and rinsed with dH20. Sections were incubated 
in developer for ~10 min until sections were pale brown/gray, stopped in 0.5% 
acetic acid 5 min, rinsed in dH2O, and mounted. Stained sections were examined 
by microscopy. Stained neurons were counted from CA2, and proportions within 
total neurons visually quantified in triplicate from entorhinal and cingulate cortex.

=== PAGE 11 ===
PNAS  2024  Vol. 121  No. 29 e2401420121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 11 of 12
Neuronal Counts.  Whole- number neuronal estimates were performed 
using the optical fractionator method (56) with stereological software (Stereo 
Investigator; MBF Bioscience). Paramedian sagittal serial sections spaced 50 µm 
apart were stained with NeuN. CA1, CA2, CA3, and other regions of interest were 
defined according to the Paxinos and Watson mouse brain atlas. A grid was placed 
randomly over the ROI, and cells were counted within three- dimensional opti-
cal dissectors (50 µm, 50 µm, 10 µm) using a 100× objective. Estimated totals 
weighted by section thickness were obtained with Stereo Investigator software, 
yielding a coefficient of error 0.10.
Behavioral Testing: General.  Testing order was randomized by alternating 
control and treatment group animal runs. Testing started at the same time 
(±1.5 h) for tests run over multiple days, with early and late times alternated 
for intergroup randomization. Testing was performed during the light phase 
exclusively. OFT was performed preceding all other behavioral tests to rule 
out motility effects.
BM test. BM testing was performed a single time only, 14 mo post- cell or - control 
injection. Mice were assessed for their ability to learn the location of an escape 
box over the course of 9 d in the BM apparatus as previously described (57).
Y- maze SAB. Mice were tested for SA a single time only, at 12 mo post- cell or 
- control injection. SAB was measured by individually placing animals in one arm 
of a symmetric Y- maze made of opaque black acrylic plastic, and the sequence of 
arm entries and total number of entries recorded over a period of 8 min.
Flinch- jump/FC tests. Flinch- jump/FC freezing times were determined 6 and 
11 mo postcell or postcontrol injection. The apparatus (Freeze Monitor™) was a 
Plexiglas box with a stainless- steel grid floor with acoustic stimulus unit on top of 
the box, and the box ringed with photo beams and computer- linked optical sen-
sors. On day 1, mice were presented with foot- shock associated with an auditory 
tone. On day 2, contextual retrieval was determined by placing the mice into the 
same test box, but without either tone or foot shocks. On day 3, cue condition-
ing was assessed in an altered environment with delivery of the auditory tone. 
Freezing time was recorded each day.
RNAseq and Gene Expression Analysis.  rRNA was depleted with NEBNext® 
rRNA Depletion Kit v2 and libraries prepared. Data were analyzed by ROSALIND® 
(https://rosalind.bio/), with their HyperScale architecture (San Diego, CA). 
Database sources referenced for enrichment analysis included Interpro, NCBI, 
MSigDB, REACTOME, and WikiPathways. Enrichment was calculated relative to a 
set of background genes relevant for the experiment.
Human Subjects. Cohort 1: 40 control individuals (CTRL); 52 MCI patients with 
an AD- characteristic CSF biomarker profile (MCI- AD); 36 MCI patients not dis-
playing an AD- characteristic CSF biomarker profile (MCI); 50 sporadic AD patients 
with an AD- characteristic CSF biomarker profile (AD). CSF samples were collected 
at Middelheim General Hospital (Antwerp, Belgium) according to described pro-
tocols (58). Inclusion criteria for controls: 1) no neurological or psychiatric ante-
cedents and 2) no organic disease involving the central nervous system upon 
extensive clinical examination. MCI patients were diagnosed applying Petersen’s 
diagnostic criteria (59) without dementia (60). AD dementia was clinically diag-
nosed according to NINCDS/ADRDA and IWG- 2 criteria (61).
Cohort 2: Cognitive Testing. 29 self- referred memory clinic patients from 
Cedars- Sinai Department of Neurosurgery clinically diagnosed as normal (n = 6),  
MCI (n = 18), dementia (n = 3), or uncertain (n = 2; on basis of cognitive testing) 
and were administered Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) (n = 22). HLA- 
A2- negative patients determined by flow cytometry were excluded from analysis, 
as were patients with ≤2.5% CD8+ cells in lymphocyte gates, or ≥20% variation 
in any staining parameter between duplicate samples.
Cohort 3: Brain western and IHC. Hippocampal lysates from 13 autopsy- 
confirmed sporadic AD patients, and 5 age- matched normal controls were run 
on WBs using anti- CD8 or anti- PRF1. Hippocampal sections from 10 autopsy- 
confirmed sporadic AD patients, and 10 age- matched normal controls were 
stained with anti- CD8- fluorescein plus APP(471–479)/HLA- A2- PE. HLA- A2- negative 
samples were not excluded from western and IHC/IF analysis.
Statistical Analysis. Power analyses for sample sizes and statistical methods 
are detailed in SI Appendix, Supplementary Test: Detailed Materials & Methods. 
Briefly, GraphPad Prism (version 5.0b; San Diego, CA) was used to analyze the 
data using appropriate statistical tests when data was normally or nonnormally 
distributed. Subject numbers and methods of reagent validation are shown in 
SI Appendix, Table S1, and all histograms depict average ± SEM.
Study Approval. All animal procedures were approved prior to performance by 
the Cedars- Sinai Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The Cedars- Sinai 
Institutional Review Board designated the analysis of deidentified human brain 
specimens from UC Davis exempt from committee review. Brain specimens were col-
lected, stored, and disseminated with prior approval by the UC Davis Medical Center 
Institutional Review Board. Sampling for cohort 1 was approved by the Medical 
Ethics Committee of the Hospital Network Antwerp (ZNA), Antwerp, Belgium.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability.  RNAseq, Western blot quanti-
tation, behavioral test data, flow cytometry data have been deposited in Open 
Science Framework (https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/354JS) (62). Model 
Organisms and/or the means to generate them will be made generally available 
for research (non- commercial) use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We gratefully acknowledge the patients and families 
who provided tissue and blood for analysis; the Cedars- Sinai Research Institute 
Biobehavioral Core for conducting mouse behavioral tests; Dr. Igor Antoshechkin 
for RNAseq performance; Dr. Jeremy Sanders and Dr. Sol Katzman for guidance 
in gene expression analysis; Ms. Hannah Schubloom and Mia Oviatt for excellent 
administrative support and editing; and Dr. Kristina Trujillo for editing and proof-
reading. NIH Grant (UC Davis Alzheimer’s Disease Center) P30AG10129 (L.- W.J.); 
NIH Grant R21NSO54162 (C.J.W.); NIH Grant R21AG033394 (R.M.C.); Cedars- 
Sinai Medical Center Biobehavioral Core (R.N.P .); Joseph Drown Foundation 
(C.J.W.); Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute (C.J.W.); and Maxine Dunitz 
Neurosurgical Institute (D.K.I.).
Author affiliations: aDepartment Neurosurgery, Maxine Dunitz Neurosurgical Institute, 
Cedars- Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048; bDepartment Psychiatry & Behavioral 
Sciences and Neuroscience Program, Graduate Division of Biological and Biomedical 
Sciences (GDBBS), Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322; cDepartment Biomedical & 
Translational Sciences, Cedars- Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048; dDepartment 
of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Western University 
of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766; eDepartment Medical Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Laboratory Medicine, Medical Investigation of Neurodevelopmental Disorders 
(M.I.N.D.) Institute, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817; fDepartment of 
Biomedical Sciences, Institute Born- Bunge, Laboratory of Neurochemistry and Behavior, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp 2610, Belgium; gDepartment of Neurology and Alzheimer 
Research Center, University of Groningen and University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen AB 9700, Netherlands; hFaculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Department of 
Translational Neurosciences, University of Antwerp, Antwerp 2610, Belgium; iDivision of 
Human Nutrition and Health, Chair Group of Nutritional Biology, Wageningen University 
& Research, Wageningen AA 6700, The Netherlands; jFaculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Vaccine and Infectious Disease Institute, Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp 2610, Belgium; kDepartment of Neurology, Memory Clinic 
of Hospital Network Antwerp, Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp BE- 2660, Belgium; 
lDepartment of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064; 
mNovAccess Global and StemVax LLC, Cleveland, OH 44023; nTranscriptome Function and 
Technology Program, Department of Biology & Biological Engineering, California Institute 
of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125; oSociety for Brain Mapping & Therapeutics, World 
Brain Mapping Foundation, Pacific Palisades, CA 90272; and pT- Neuro Pharma, Inc., 
Albuquerque, NM 87123
Author contributions: R.C., R.N.P., J.A.R., D.K.I., B.A.W., and C.J.W. designed research; A.P., 
A.R., M.J., R.M.C., R.C., N.G., R.N.P., G.D., A.M., D.G., L.- W.J., D.V.D., Y.V., H.D.R., P.P.D.D., 
D.K.I., B.A.W., and C.J.W. performed research; A.R., R.C., R.N.P., L.- W.J., Y.V., H.D.R., 
P.P.D.D., K.L.B., D.K.I., B.A.W., and C.J.W. contributed new reagents/analytic tools; A.P., 
A.R., M.J., R.M.C., R.C., N.G., R.N.P., G.D., A.M., H.S., D.V.D., Y.V., H.D.R., P.P.D.D., D.K.I., 
B.A.W., and C.J.W. analyzed data; R.N.P., L.- W.J., and P.P.D.D. advised on paper framing 
& design; J.A.R. facilitated collaborations, advised on paper framing & design; K.L.B. and 
C.J.W. facilitated collaborations, supervised facilities and personnel; and A.P., A.R., R.C., 
and C.J.W. wrote the paper.
1. A. Codita, B. Winblad, A. H. Mohammed, Of mice and men: More neurobiology in dementia.  
Curr. Opin. Psychiatry 19, 555–563 (2006).
2. O. Wirths, S. Zampar, Neuron loss in Alzheimer’s disease: Translation in transgenic mouse models. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21, 8144 (2020).
3. E. S. Musiek, D. A. Bennett, Aducanumab and the “post- amyloid” era of Alzheimer research? Neuron 
109, 3045–3047 (2021).
4. G. Chételat et al., Amyloid imaging in cognitively normal individuals, at- risk populations and 
preclinical Alzheimer’s disease. Neuroimage Clin. 2, 356–365 (2013).
5. J. Yao et al., Mitochondrial bioenergetic deficit precedes Alzheimer’s pathology in female mouse 
model of Alzheimer’s disease. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 14670–14675 (2009).
6. J. F. Arboleda- Velasquez et al., Resistance to autosomal dominant Alzheimer’s disease in an APOE3 
Christchurch homozygote: A case report. Nat. Med. 25, 1680–1683 (2019).

=== PAGE 12 ===
12 of 12   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2401420121 pnas.org
7. M. R. Wardell, S. O. Brennan, E. D. Janus, R. Fraser, R. W. Carrell, Apolipoprotein E2- Christchurch (136 
Arg––Ser). New variant of human apolipoprotein E in a patient with type III hyperlipoproteinemia.  
J. Clin. Invest. 80, 483–490 (1987).
8. D. Gate et al., Clonally expanded CD8 T cells patrol the cerebrospinal fluid in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Nature 577, 399–404 (2020).
9. B. Altendorfer et al., Transcriptomic profiling identifies CD8(+) T cells in the brain of aged 
and Alzheimer’s disease transgenic mice as tissue- resident memory T cells. J. Immunol. 209, 
1272–1285 (2022).
10. C. Laurent et al., Hippocampal T cell infiltration promotes neuroinflammation and cognitive decline 
in a mouse model of tauopathy. Brain 140, 184–200 (2017).
11. M. S. Unger et al., CD8(+) T- cells infiltrate Alzheimer’s disease brains and regulate neuronal-  and 
synapse- related gene expression in APP- PS1 transgenic mice. Brain Behav. Immun. 89, 67–86 (2020).
12. N. Piehl et al., Cerebrospinal fluid immune dysregulation during healthy brain aging and cognitive 
impairment. Cell 185, 5028–5039.e5013 (2022).
13. G. K. Wilcock, M. M. Esiri, Plaques, tangles and dementia. A quantitative study. J. Neurol. Sci. 56, 
343–356 (1982).
14. P . V. Arriagada, J. H. Growdon, E. T. Hedley- Whyte, B. T. Hyman, Neurofibrillary tangles but not senile 
plaques parallel duration and severity of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 42, 631–639 (1992).
15. X. Chen et al., Microglia- mediated T cell infiltration drives neurodegeneration in tauopathy. Nature 
615, 668–677 (2023).
16. W. Su et al., CXCR6 orchestrates brain CD8(+) T cell residency and limits mouse Alzheimer’s disease 
pathology. Nat. Immunol. 24, 1735–1747 (2023).
17. C. J. Wheeler, Evolutionary selection of APOEɛ4 encourages increased focus on immunity in 
Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 93, 919–921 (2023).
18. A. Panwar et al., Functional recreation of age- related CD8 T cells in young mice identifies drivers of 
aging-  and human- specific tissue pathology. Mech. Ageing Dev. 191, 111351 (2020).
19. B. R. Lawson et al., The role of alpha beta+ T cells and homeostatic T cell proliferation in  
Y- chromosome- associated murine lupus. J. Immunol. 167, 2354–2360 (2001).
20. M. G. Pitts, D. Nardo, C. M. Isom, V. J. Venditto, Autoantibody responses to apolipoprotein A- I are not 
diet-  or sex- linked in C57BL/6 mice. Immunohorizons 4, 455–463 (2020).
21. R. Schwab et al., Expanded CD4+ and CD8+ T cell clones in elderly humans. J. Immunol. 158, 
4493–4499 (1997).
22. R. M. Cohen et al., A transgenic Alzheimer rat with plaques, tau pathology, behavioral impairment, 
oligomeric abeta, and frank neuronal loss. J. Neurosci. 33, 6245–6256 (2013).
23. C. Reitz, L. Honig, J. P . Vonsattel, M. X. Tang, R. Mayeux, Memory performance is related to amyloid 
and tau pathology in the hippocampus. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 80, 715–721 (2009).
24. J. D. Sluimer et al., Whole- brain atrophy rate and cognitive decline: longitudinal MR study of 
memory clinic patients. Radiology 248, 590–598 (2008).
25. A. Serrano- Pozo, M. P . Frosch, E. Masliah, B. T. Hyman, Neuropathological alterations in Alzheimer 
disease. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Med. 1, a006189 (2011).
26. R. J. Douglas, in “The development of hippocampal function: implications for theory and therapy” in 
The Hippocampus: Neurophysiology and Behavior, R. L. Isaacson, K. H. Pribram, Eds. (Plenum,  
New York, NY, 1975), vol. 2, pp. 327–361.
27. R. J. Kirkby, A maturation factor in spontaneous alteration. Nature 215, 784 (1967).
28. Q. L. Ma et al., Beta- amyloid oligomers induce phosphorylation of tau and inactivation of insulin 
receptor substrate via c- Jun N- terminal kinase signaling: Suppression by omega- 3 fatty acids and 
curcumin. J Neurosci. 29, 9078–9089 (2009).
29. M. M. Karabeg et al., 5- HTT deficiency affects neuroplasticity and increases stress sensitivity 
resulting in altered spatial learning performance in the Morris water maze but not in the Barnes 
maze. PloS ONE 8, e78238 (2013).
30. M. R. Brier et al., Tau and Abeta imaging, CSF measures, and cognition in Alzheimer’s disease.  
Sci. Translational Med. 8, 338ra366 (2016).
31. L. M. Wakim et al., The molecular signature of tissue resident memory CD8 T cells isolated from the 
brain. J. Immunol. 189, 3462–3471 (2012).
32. C. Cebrián et al., MHC- I expression renders catecholaminergic neurons susceptible to T- cell- mediated 
degeneration. Nat. Commun. 5, 3633 (2014).
33. K. Lin et al., MHC class I H2- Kb negatively regulates neural progenitor cell proliferation by 
inhibiting FGFR signaling. PLoS Biol 19, e3001311 (2021).
34. R. Mukhopadhyay et al., DAPK- ZIPK- L13a axis constitutes a negative- feedback module regulating 
inflammatory gene expression. Mol. Cell 32, 371–382 (2008).
35. C. Bellenguez et al., New insights into the genetic etiology of Alzheimer’s disease and related 
dementias. Nat. Genet. 54, 412–436 (2022).
36. N. Ciesielska et al., Is the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test better suited than the  
Mini- Mental State Examination (MMSE) in mild cognitive impairment (MCI) detection among 
people aged over 60? Meta- analysis. Psychiatr. Pol. 50, 1039–1052 (2016).
37. S. Palmqvist et al., Discriminative accuracy of plasma phospho- tau217 for Alzheimer disease vs 
other neurodegenerative disorders. JAMA 324, 772–781 (2020).
38. C. Schwab, M. Hosokawa, P . L. McGeer, Transgenic mice overexpressing amyloid beta protein are an 
incomplete model of Alzheimer disease. Exp. Neurol. 188, 52–64 (2004).
39. S. Capsoni et al., Alzheimer- like neurodegeneration in aged antinerve growth factor transgenic 
mice. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 6826–6831 (2000).
40. S. E. Stepp et al., Perforin gene defects in familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. Science 
286, 1957–1959 (1999).
41. T. C. Browne et al., IFN- gamma Production by amyloid beta- specific Th1 cells promotes microglial 
activation and increases plaque burden in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Immunol. 190, 
2241–2251 (2013).
42. G. Jacquemin et al., Granzyme B- induced mitochondrial ROS are required for apoptosis. Cell Death 
Differ. 22, 862–874 (2015).
43. D. Martinvalet, ROS signaling during granzyme B- mediated apoptosis. Mol. Cell Oncol. 2, e992639 
(2015).
44. E. Lana et al., Perforin promotes amyloid beta internalisation in neurons. Mol. Neurobiol. 54, 
874–887 (2017).
45. D. Sredni- Kenigsbuch, TH1/TH2 cytokines in the central nervous system. Int. J. Neurosci. 112, 
665–703 (2002).
46. D. Ferreira, A. Nordberg, E. Westman, Biological subtypes of Alzheimer disease: A systematic review 
and meta- analysis. Neurology 94, 436–448 (2020).
47. P . Theofilas, S. Dunlop, H. Heinsen, L. T. Grinberg, Turning on the light within: Subcortical nuclei 
of the isodentritic core and their role in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 46, 
17–34 (2015).
48. S. H. Choi, R. E. Tanzi, Is Alzheimer’s disease a neurogenesis disorder? Cell stem. cell 25, 7–8 
(2019).
49. W. A. Banks, S. M. Robinson, S. Verma, J. E. Morley, Efflux of human and mouse amyloid beta 
proteins 1–40 and 1–42 from brain: Impairment in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neuroscience 121, 487–492 (2003).
50. R. W. Shin et al., Amyloid beta- protein (Abeta) 1–40 but not Abeta1- 42 contributes to the 
experimental formation of Alzheimer disease amyloid fibrils in rat brain. J. Neurosci. 17, 
8187–8193 (1997).
51. T. Uchihara, M. Hara, A. Nakamura, K. Hirokawa, Tangle evolution linked to differential 3-  and 
4- repeat tau isoform deposition: A double immunofluorolabeling study using two monoclonal 
antibodies. Histochem. Cell Biol. 137, 261–267 (2012).
52. V. Ilievski et al., Chronic oral application of a periodontal pathogen results in brain inflammation, 
neurodegeneration and amyloid beta production in wild type mice. PloS ONE 13, e0204941 (2018).
53. B. Rocha, N. Dautigny, P . Pereira, Peripheral T lymphocytes: Expansion potential and homeostatic 
regulation of pool sizes and CD4/CD8 ratios in vivo. Eur. J. Immunol. 19, 905–911 (1989).
54. B. Ernst, D. S. Lee, J. M. Chang, J. Sprent, C. D. Surh, The peptide ligands mediating positive 
selection in the thymus control T cell survival and homeostatic proliferation in the periphery. 
Immunity 11, 173–181 (1999).
55. F. R. Petry et al., Specificity of anti- tau antibodies when analyzing mice models of Alzheimer’s 
disease: Problems and solutions. PloS ONE 9, e94251 (2014).
56. M. J. West, L. Slomianka, H. J. G. Gundersen, Unbiased stereological estimation of the total number 
of neurons in the subdivisions of the rat hippocampus using the optical fractionator. Anat. Rec. 231, 
482–497 (1991).
57. M. W. Pitts, Barnes maze procedure for spatial learning and memory in mice. Bio- Protocol 8, e2744 
(2018).
58. S. Engelborghs et al., Diagnostic performance of a CSF- biomarker panel in autopsy- confirmed 
dementia. Neurobiol. Aging 29, 1143–1159 (2008).
59. R. C. Petersen, Mild cognitive impairment as a diagnostic entity. J. Inter. Med. 256, 183–194 (2004).
60. G. M. McKhann et al., The diagnosis of dementia due to Alzheimer’s disease: Recommendations 
from the National Institute on Aging- Alzheimer’s Association workgroups on diagnostic guidelines 
for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Dementia 7, 263–269 (2011).
61. B. Dubois et al., Advancing research diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease: The IWG- 2 criteria. 
Lancet Neurol. 13, 614–629 (2014).
62. A. Panwar et al., Panwar, Rentsendorj, Jhun et al., PNAS 2024. Open Science Framework. http://doi.
org/10.17605/OSF.IO/354JS. Deposited 8 May 2024.

